-----------------------------------------
YAT Yet Another Terminal v.1.0
2021 - 2022 Armando Pérez

Based on awesome TCPCON and Telnet of:
    Néstor Soriano (Konamiman)
    Oduvaldo Pavan Junior (ducasp)
-----------------------------------------



 -------- CONTENTS

 1.- INTRODUCTION / AIM.

 2.- FEATURES.

    2.1.- TCP/IP UNAPI
    2.2.- YMODEM.
    2.3.- DOS 2.
    2.4.- ANSI.
    2.5.- TELNET.

 3.- USING YAT.

    3.1.- COMMAND LINE / CONNECTION.
    3.2.- CONFIG, KEYS AND ACTIONS.
    3.3.- HELP.
    3.4.- DOWNLOAD FILE.
    3.5.- UPLOAD FILE.
    3.6.- SELECT FILE TO UPLOAD / DOWNLOAD.
    3.7.- SELECT TRANSMISSION PROTOCOL.
    3.8.- SELECT TRANSFER TERMINAL TYPE.
    3.9.- CLOSING / ABORTING CONNECTION.

 4.- PROTOCOLS.

 5.- FILE TRANSMISSION.

    5.1.- UPLOADING A FILE.
    5.2.- DOWNLOADING A FILE.

 6.- UPLOAD AND DOWNLOAD QWK OFFLINE MAIL.

    6.1.- EYE OF THE BEHOLDER BBS (EOTB).
    6.2.- HISPAMSX BBS.
    6.3.- SOTANO MSX BBS.

 7.- SOURCE FILES / ASSEMBLING YAT.

 8.- THANKS TO...


 -------- 1.- INTRODUCTION / AIM.

YAT is another telnet program for MSX. There are a lot of great terminal/telnet/
communication programs in MSX. RS232 like COMS6, ERIX or BaDCaT Wifi
Modem and TCP/IP UNAPI like Ducasp Telnet or Konamiman's simplified terminal
TCPCON.

Why a new one? Because there is no terminal for TCP/IP UNAPI supporting Ymodem
upload protocol. In other words: You can't upload files to Bulletin Board
Systems (BBS) or other machines using Ymodem (XModem Checksum / CRC) protocol.

Why do you need a terminal/telnet with full Ymodem support? Why not? :)

My main goal is returning to my BBS/Fidonet activities. I mean, I would like to
read / write / create echomail and netmail as I used to do 20 years ago. It
sounds very sad but today with the new and great communication cartridge/boards
(GR8NET, DENYUNET, OBSONET, ...) we can't upload QWK mail to any BBS.

YAT is a real raw terminal. This means it's not a fast / colorful terminal.
And YAT does not support ANSI. No menus, no online-help. The aim is
upload/download files to/from BBS systems.

So if you want to enjoy ANSI Art you are in the wrong place. Neither if you want
to use YAT as online-terminal to interact, read or write messages.




 -------- 2.- FEATURES.

    * Minimum requirements: MSX with MSX-DOS and TCP/IP UNAPI.

    * Features:

            - DOS2 support (support DOS2 file/path style)

            - Full YModem transmission protocol (upload / download)

            - Annoying ANSI clean support.


 ---- 2.1.- TCP/IP UNAPI

MSX-UNAPI is a standard procedure for defining, discovering and using new APIs
(Application Program Interfaces) for MSX computer. TCP/IP UNAPI implements
TCP/IP stack.

YAT searches and uses any TCP/IP UNAPI implementation running on your MSX. If
more than one implementation is available YAT uses the first one.


 ---- 2.2.- YMODEM.

YModem transmission protocol was defined / developed by Chuck Forsberg as an
expansion of Ward Christensen's original XModem file transfer protocol in 1985.
YModem extends Xmodem mainly with 3 features:

    - CRC instead Checksum (previously developed in XModem CRC extension).

    - Adds block 0 "header" with filename, size, date of file allowing "batch"
      transfers (multiple files) and removes the extra "padding" at end of file.

    - Allowed 128 and 1024 block sizes improving transmission speed (previously
      developed in Xmodem 1k extension).

YModem was developed thinking in the full XModem backward compatibility. Namely
YAT, supporting full YModem protocol, has native and complete XModem, XModem CRC
and XModem 1k support.

However, this version still does not support the modern YModem G protocol.


 ---- 2.3.- DOS 2.

YAT supports MSX-DOS2 and higher operating system (like Nextor). You can fill
"Upload / Download" file with DOS2 filename/path style as C:\YAT\UPLOAD\EOTB-BBS.REP


 ---- 2.4.- ANSI.

Colorful ANSI Art is awesome. There are a lot of sites, programs and BBSs where
you can enjoy ANSI Art / Colors.

YAT is using text mode with no colors so it can't show  ANSI Colors nor ANSI Art
(ANSI sequences are tossed).

However YAT tries to toss ANSI sequences to avoid showing "annoying" chars in
screen. It's not perfect, though.

Please visit Sotano MSX BBS and enjoy ANSI with Ducasp Telnet! (sotanomsxbbs.org)


 ---- 2.5.- TELNET.

YAT isn't a real Telnet. It's not a fully compliant telnet protocol. However it
can parse easy telnet commands and send to BBSs terminal type and window size.
This is not the aim of YAT as you know, but we can avoid problems when
navigating through menus and BBSs options.

YAT "talks" with the BBS and "introduce" YAT as Telnet program. This is
necessary to try to avoid problems with "double #FF" sequence in upload/download
process.




 -------- 3.- USING YAT.

YAT is easy to understand and to use, though the lack of menus and the crudeness
of the text-only screen could drive the user crazy. However, if your regular
activity is to upload and download mail you will always follow the same actions.


 ---- 3.1.- COMMAND LINE  / CONNECTION.

YAT usage:

    Yet Another Terminal 1.0
    UNAPI TCP/IP Simplified Terminal
    with YMODEM transfer support.
    *** Based on Konamiman TCPCON ***
    >>> 2021 - 2022 Armando Perez <<<

    Usage: YAT <host | IP > [port]
          <host | IP> : host or IP 
          port: if not specified default 23

    Example: YAT bbs.beholderbbs.org 23

To establish a connection with your favorite BBSs / machine you must specify the
host or IP and port. If port is not specified YAT will use port 23 (common BBSs
port)

Examples:

    YAT bbs.beholderbbs.org
    YAT bbs.beholderbbs.org 23
    YAT 2.139.195.193
    YAT sotanomsxbbs.org
    YAT bbs.hispamsx.org 23

Once connection is established YAT will execute an infinite loop:

    - Get TCP/IP data
    - Parse data (telnet commands, remove annoying ANSI...)
    - Get input data
    - Send input data to remote
    - Get and process special commands input commands (upload / download /
      options).

Then you will be able to interact with the remote machine through the options
that remote host will show you.


 ---- 3.2.- CONFIG, KEYS AND ACTIONS.

There are a few options you can change / choose. To select / change the options
you can use these special keys any time. "Popup" will be shown with the options
and how to select them. Also there are a few special keys and actions.

    <F1>: Actually this is no an option / action but a little help + state of
    your config options.

    <F2>: Download file. Start download file with selected protocol.

    <F3>: Upload file. Start upload selected file with selected protocol.

    <F4>: Select filename to upload / download

    <F5>: Select transmission protocol.

    <SELECT>: Select (internal) Terminal Type.

    <ESC>: Close connection (any time) and exit.

    <CTRL> + <ESC> : Abort connection (any time) and exit.


 ---- 3.3.- HELP.

By pressing <F1> help and current configuration will be shown in the screen.

Example:

 << YAT HELP >>

    <F1> Show this help.
    <F2> Download file.
    <F3> Upload file.
    <F4> Select File to upload / download.
    <F5> Select Transfer Protocol
    <SELECT> Select Terminal Type

 << YAT CONFIG >>

 Upload File: C:\FIDONET\eotb-bbs.rep
 Download File:  B:\MAIL\INCOMING\EOTB-BBS.QW7
 Protocol: XModem CRC
 Terminal Type: Telnet transfer


 ---- 3.4.- DOWNLOAD FILE.

By pressing <F2> YAT will start upload process. Please refer download section
for details.


 ---- 3.5.- UPLOAD FILE.

By pressing <F3> YAT will start upload process. Please refer upload section
for details.


 ---- 3.6.- SELECT FILE TO UPLOAD / DOWNLOAD.

By pressing <F4> YAT will show a popup selection with two options:

 File choice:

 Upload file:
 Download file:


Upload file will be mandatory if you want to transfer file to remote machine.
Unlike download this filename is mandatory since YAT can't know what file you
want to transfer.

Download file will be introduced only if your remote host is not able to
transfer files with YModem protocol (XModem or its extensions).

As YAT is DOS2 compliant you can use DOS2 file/path style format for your
filenames. For example:

 Upload file: D:\MY\FILE\TO\UPLOAD.LZH
 Download file: D:\MY\FILE\FROM\REMOTE.TXT

To select file, introduce filename and press RETURN. You can check your
selection showing help (<F1>).


 ---- 3.7.- SELECT TRANSMISSION PROTOCOL.

By pressing <F5> YAT will show:

 Protocol choices:

 <X> XModem (Checksum)
 <C> XModem CRC
 <Y> YModem

 Select protocol (+ ENTER):

You are allowed to select protocol (by pressing <X>, <C>, <Y> + ENTER) or abort
choice by pressing ENTER without option. Abort will keep your current protocol
option.

By default YAT starts with YModem option.


 ---- 3.8.- SELECT TRANSFER TERMINAL TYPE.

By pressing <SELECT> YAT will show:

 Term Transfer choices:

 <T> Telnet (double FF)
 <M> Terminal
 Select term (+ENTER):

You are allowed to select protocol (by pressing <T> or <M> + ENTER) or abort
choice by pressing ENTER without option. Abort will keep your current term
transfer option.

By default YAT start with Telnet transfer option.


 ----- 3.9.- CLOSING / ABORTING CONNECTION.

By pressing (any time) <ESC> connection will be closed and YAT will return to
DOS.

By pressing (any time) <CTRL> + <ESC> connection will be aborted and YAT will
return to DOS.

You can cancel your connection even during a transfer.




 -------- 4.- PROTOCOLS.

YAT is fully compatible with:

    - YModem Batch
    - YModem
    - XModem CRC 1k
    - XModem CRC
    - XModem Checksum

YAT tries to detect the protocol used by remote host both in upload and
download. And YModem _should be_ backward compatible with XModem. However there
are tons of implementations of these protocols and we recommend to select the
protocol before the transfer.

Namely: If you know what's the protocol your remote host is using then select it
before starting your transfers.

YAT XModem CRC is fully compatible with XModem CRC and XModem 1k CRC. However
YAT will never send 1k block (upload).

XModem (general) protocols don't send / receive headers. So the remote machine
and sender machine need the filename. If you are using XModem protocol remember
fill Upload and/or Download filename before transfer.

YAT implements the backward compatibility with XModem. If you are waiting a file
transmission via YModem and your remote host (sender) sends XModem block YAT
will try to store your previously filled filename.

YModem Batch (real Ymodem) is only allowed in downloads. This version does not
allow multiple files upload. However if the sender sends multiple files all of
them will be stored on your disk.


 -------- 5.- FILE TRANSMISSION.

This chapter describes how to upload and download files to/from remote host
(mainly BBSs) with XModem/YModem protocol support.

When you press <F2> or <F3> YAT leaves the infinite send/receive loop and enters
in a special upload / download process. The processes, both, share the same
symbols:

    * Transfer symbols:

    ^  :  YAT trying to upload a block.
    v  :  YAT trying to download a block.
    A  :  128 bytes block uploaded/downloaded with sucess.
    1A :  1024 bytes block uploaded/downloaded with sucess.
    N  :  Block sent/received with error (CRC, checksum).

    * Begin transmission symbols:

    NAK:  Receiver waiting XModem start block.
    C  :  Receiver waiting YModem / XModem CRC start block.
    C  :  Receiver waiting YModem Header block.
    G  :  Receiver waiting YModem G transmission. (not supported)


 ---- 5.1.- UPLOADING A FILE.


There is an important warning regarding filename. MSX-DOS(2) is case
unsensitive. You can write your filename as (example) myfile.LZH or MYfile.lzh
or MYFILE.LZH. However your remote host, usually, could be case sensitive.
YModem protocol transfers the filename of the file you are uploading and the
remote host (for example if you are uploading mail file) checks if the filename
*match* with the filename you transferred in your Ymodem Header.

In other words: If you remote host (BBS) is waiting "eotb-bbs.rep", please fill
your filename as "eotb-bbs.rep". Don't fill it as EOTB-BBS.REP or similar. In
that case your upload file never will be processed by the remote host.


 * Common for all protocols:

    - Select upload file by pressing <F4>.

    - Select upload protocol (supported by your remote host) by pressing <F5>.
    Remember YModem is the default protocol. And selected protocol keeps in
    config until YAT is closed.

    - Select the menus and option (in your BBS) to upload file and select protocol.

    - Press <F3> to start process. Follow screen feedback / instructions.



 * XModem Checksum:

    - Receiver could show in screen waiting action (optional) as C or NAK.

    - When you press <F3> screen will show:

        Opening file: xxxxxx.xxx

        Waiting Action (NAK, C, G...) from receiver ->  NAK

        >>> Starting XMODEM upload <<<<
        ^A^A^A [...]
        ...
        XFER Finished


 * XModem CRC:


    - Receiver could show in screen waiting action (optional) as C or NAK.

    - When you press <F3> screen will show:
    C
        Opening file: xxxxxx.xxx

        Waiting Action (NAK, C, G...) from receiver ->  C

        >>> Starting XMODEM CRC upload <<<<
        ^A^A^A [...]
        ...
        XFER Finished

 * YModem:

    - Receiver could show in screen waiting action (optional) as C or NAK.

    - When you press <F3> screen will show:
    CC
        Opening file: xxxxxx.xxx

        Waiting Action (NAK, C, G...) from receiver ->  C

        >>> Starting YMODEM upload <<<<
        ^ YMODEM Header: xxxxxx.xxx SSSS TTTTTTTT 0 0 1 SSSS
        ^1A^1A^A [...]
        ...
        XFER Finished


 ---- 5.2.- DOWNLOADING A FILE.

  * Common for XModem Checksum / XModem CRC

    - Select download filename by pressing <F4>.

  * Common for all protocols

    - Select download protocol (supported by your remote host) by pressing <F5>.
    Remember YModem is the default protocol. And selected protocol keeps in
    config until YAT is closed.

    - Select the menus and option (in your BBS) to download file and select protocol.

    - Press <F2> to start process. Follow screen feedback / instructions.

   * XModem Checksum:

        >>> Starting XMODEM download <<<

        Creating file: xxxxx.xxx
        NAK
        vAvAvA[...]
        ...
        XFER Finished

   * XModem CRC:

        >>> Starting XMODEM CRC download <<<

        Creating file: xxxxx.xxx
        C
        vAvAvA[...]
        ...
        XFER Finished

   * YModem:

        >>> Starting YMODEM download <<<

        v YMODEM Header: xxxxxx.xxx SSSS
        C
        v1Av1AvA[...]
        ...

        >>> Starting YMODEM download <<<

        v YMODEM Header: Received finish transmission header.




 -------- 6.- UPLOAD AND DOWNLOAD QWK OFFLINE MAIL.


Although all BBS systems are very similar the chapter describes how to upload
and download QWK mail filenames to/from 3 different BBS systems.

All of them support YModem so you don't need to change protocol (remember YModem
is the default protocol).


 ---- 6.1.- EYE OF THE BEHOLDER BBS (EOTB).


 * Connection and welcome screen:

    YAT bbs.beholderbbs.org

    ...

    Eye of the Beholder (#XXXX), using BBBS/Li6 v.x.xx blah.

    Welcome to this BBBS system.

    What is your name? Armando Perez

    Please enter your password (dots will echo): .......



 * User info and short menu is shown:

    You are user number :x
    Times on this system: xxxx
    [...]

    Happy birthday to:

    *somebody*

    Main Commands: <?> help <R>eadmenu <F>iles <Utility menu>
    --- more --- (Y/n/c)


 * Configuration. If your user is already configured skip the step.

    - Press U (Utility Menu)
    - Press n

    - Press AF
    - Select LZH by

    - Press T
    - Select YModem Batch by pressing YB

    - Press GF
    - Select QWK by pressing W

    - Press Q for returning to main menu.


 * Download new mail (eotb-bbs.qwX file).

    - On main menu press "md" + intro.

    - BBS search, packet and creates QWK file and finally shows:

    Filename: eotb-bbs.qwX (on X should be a number)
    YModem Batch send ready. Start your transfer now.
    Starting YModem Batch send now.

    - Press <F2>. File will be transfered and stored in disk.


 * Upload new mail (eotb-bbs.rep file)

    - Select your upload REP file by pressing <F4>:

    Upload filename: eotb-bbs.rep
    Download filename:

    - On main menu press "mu" + intro.

    - BBS shows:

    Filename: eotb-bbs.rep
    YModem Batch receive ready. Start your transfer now.
    Starting YModem Batch receive now.
    C

    - Press <F3>: File will be transfered and processed by EOTB BBS.


 ---- 6.2.- HISPAMSX BBS.

 * Connection and welcome screen:

    YAT bbs.hispamsx.org

    ...

     Synchronet BBS for Linux  Version 3.19  Copyright 2022 Rob Swindell

HispaMSX BBS version 3.0
Copyright 2005-2019 by Carlos Milan Figueredo
23414 Bytes free
Ok
BLOAD"HISPAMSX.BIN",R

    ...

    Enter User Name or Number or 'New' or 'Guest'
    Login: Armando Perez
    Password: ******

 * Main Menu:

   - Press Q (QWK packet transfer)

 * QWK Offline Reader Menu

   - C (Change Packet configuration)

        - T Archive Type (select LZH and return to main menu).

 * Download new mail (HISPAMSX.qwk)

    - Press D

    - Press Y (YModem (SZ))


 [+] Hang up after transfer? Yes / No (as you wish)

 Start transfer now (Ctrl-X to abort):

    - Press <F2>. File will be transfered and stored in disk.


 * Upload new mail (HISPAMSX.REP)

     - Select your upload REP file by pressing <F4>:

    Upload filename: HISPAMSX.REP
    Download filename:

     - Press U

     - Press Y (Ymodem (SZ))

 [+] Hang up after transfer? Yes / No (as you wish)

    - Press <F3>: File will be transfered and processed.



 ---- 6.3.- SOTANO MSX BBS.


 * Connection and welcome screen:

    YAT sotanomsxbbs.org

    ...


 Mystic BBS Version xxxxxx
 Copyright (C) 1997 - 2020 By James Coyle

 (0) Ascii (No Color)
 (1) Ansi (Color

 Graphics Mode ->


    - Press 0

 [0] MS-DOS CP437
 [1] UTF-8

 Select Terminal [Enter = CP437]:

    - Press Enter

  Available themes:

    ...
    ...
    ...


    - Select theme with no graphics and no colors (usually 6)


 [] Enter your user name: Armando Perez
 [] Enter your password: $$$$$$$

 * Main menu.

    - Press M

    - Press O


 * QWK Offline Mail...

    - Press A to select LZH/LHA archive type

    - Press E to disable QWKE extended Packets. (No)

  * Download new mail (MYSTIC.qwk)

    - Press [Y] Ymodem

 Press [ENTER / S]tart YModem transfer and then [F1 + G + ENTER]:

    - WARNING HERE. The above Sotano MSX BBS message was intented for help
    Ducasp's Telnet users with YModem-G transfers.

    - Press ENTER

    - Press <F2>. File will be transfered and stored in disk.


  * Upload new mail (MYSTIC.rep)


    - Select your upload REP file by pressing <F4>:

    Upload filename: MYSTIC.rep
    Download filename:

    - Press U (Upload REP Packet)

    - Press [Y] Ymodem

 Press [ENTER / S]tart YModem transfer and then [F1 + G + ENTER]:

    - Press ENTER

    - Press <F3>: File will be transfered and processed.


 -------- 7.- SOURCE FILES / ASSEMBLING YAT.

The code is provided as it is. It may work in your computer, it may not work. It
may even crash it or, eventually, create a time paradox, the result of which
could cause a chain reaction that would unravel the very fabric of the
space-time continuum and destroy the entire universe.

To assemble YAT project you need SjasmPlus assembler:

    https://github.com/z00m128/sjasmplus

Also an *NIX environment system supporting "make" build automation tool. For
Windows you can install Cygwin or MinGW.

The project is presented with this organization:

Makefile
|
+--- DOC
+--- SRC


    - Makefile: Rules and directives for make tool.
    - DOC: Directory containing this file.
    - SRC: Source files.

To assemble type make. YAT.COM will be generaded automatically and stored in
root directory.

Type "make clean" to clean temporal files.




 -------- 8.- THANKS TO...

    - EOTB Sysop, HispaMSX BBS Sysop, Zruspa's BBS Sysop, Sotano Sysop for help
    testing YAT.

    - Oduvaldo Pavan Junior (ducasp): For developing his open source TELNET tool.

    - Néstor Soriano (Konamiman) for develop the awesome TCP/IP Unapi.

    - All BBS Sysops and Fidonet people for keeping alive Fidonet.

